Close up of Young Plan Growing through Coins.
Strategies, Methods and Tips To Financial Freedom
Building a Basic Budget
Woman Typing and Writing Simultaneously
How to Start a Budget
The 50/30/20 Rule
How to Save and Pay off Debt
Adapt The 50/30/20 Rule For You
Staying On Track
Money is a powerful tool, no matter if you have a little or a lot. Money can help you achieve your dreams, support your loved ones, and make a positive impact on the world. However, if left unmanaged, it can cause you a lot of stress, frustration, and anxiety. Regardless of your income level, money needs to be managed. By creating a structured budget, you can begin to harness the power of your money and alleviate the anxiety and frustration that comes along with it.
Introduction
1 	or example, if you value your physical health but spend $150a month on junk food, you may need to examine this value and make some decisions and goals accordingly. If your goal is to travel but you have no money in savings, you may need to start making some difficult decisions about where your money is going. Budgeting is a way of aligning your money with your life, taking control of your finances, and creating the future you want.
Setting out a budget opens your eyes to where your money is going. It shows you where your priorities and values lie, and how those priorities align with your goals.
It is important to tailor a budget that fits within your income level and lifestyle. A budget is about so much more than finances. It is a reflection of your values, priorities, and goals.
Introduction
A properly designed budget will empower you and give you confidence in your financial future. By preparing a tailored budget you can:
Save for emergencies
Spend more money on what is important to you
Put away money for retirement or other important goals
Pay off debt and save on interest fees
Stop overspending and living beyond your means
Reduce stress and anxiety about your financial future
Improve your credit score
Enjoy life, worry free
3	Deposit your budget
The tools we employ in this e-book are simple yet effective. We will teach you how to use the 50/30/20 rule to build a basic budget and tailor it to your individual needs. We will discuss the debt snowball method and how to incorporate it into your financial plan. And we will touch on the sinking funds method to develop your long-term financial goals.
By the end of this eBook, you will have a clear understanding of how to budget your money for your lifestyle. You will be comfortable with the basics of budgeting, as well as multiple tools and strategies to reach your goals. Most importantly, you will be armed with the knowledge to embark on an exciting journey to financial empowerment and financial freedom.
4	Definition of Terms
First, let's make sure we are all on the same page. Here are some definitions to help you get familiar:
Gross income - total income, before taxes or deductions
Net worth - the sum of all assets and liabilities
Debt - money owed
Debt snowball - method to pay off debt, creating a snowball effect to continue to pay off debt
Net income - total income, after taxes or deductions
Assets - something you own that is of value
Liabilities - something you own that you owe money towards
Sinking fund - method for saving each month
5	Gross Income
Taxes and Deductions
 Net Income
Irregular Income
 Net Worth
Chapter 1
How to Start a Budget
Woman Working from Home
To get started we must figure out how much money we have to budget. To calculate your gross income, add up all the sources of income you receive on a regular basis.
This can include:
Employment income
Bonuses, commission, tips, or overtime pay
Income from side hustles, freelancing, or self-employment
Investments, dividends, interest, or rental properties
Pension, social security, alimony, or child support
Gross Income
Add all your income sources together, this number is your gross income.
Save money
Taxes and Deductions
Next, we must look at all our taxes and deductions.
This may include:
Federal income tax
State/provincial income tax
Local income tax
Other social taxes/services (e.g., social security, public pension plans, etc.)
Health insurance premiums or related health deductions
Retirement contributions (e.g., 401k or IRA)
Other benefits or deductions (e.g., life insurance, disability insurance, union dues, etc.)
Add all your taxes and deductions. We will use this to calculate your net income.
Net Income
To calculate your net income; take your gross income (the number we calculated earlier from all our sources of income) and subtract your taxes and deductions.
Net Income = Gross Income – Taxes and Deductions
Tip
A quick way to check your deductions is to review your most recent pay stub.
Net income is your after-taxes or “take home” pay. This is the basis for your budget. This number dictates how much we can dedicate to our wants, needs, savings, and debts.
Save money
 Your net income is important when we start to discuss the 50/30/20 rule. More on that soon, butfor now let's look at a real-life example of how to calculate your net income.
$4,000 - ($800 + $100 + $150 + $60 + $200 + $250) = $2,440
Say you earn $4,000 per month in gross income from your job. After subtracting $800 in federal income tax, $100 instate income tax, $150 in social security, $60 in Medicare, $200 in health insurance premiums, and $250 in retirement contributions, your net income is $2,440 per month. Your net income is the money you take home and the starting point ofyour budget.
(Gross Income)
(Deductions)
(Net Income)
Irregular Income
Add your income from the past 12 months and divide by 12 to get an average monthly income. Use this as your net income.
If you have irregular income (commission, self-employed, etc.) that varies from month to month there are two options to calculate your net income:
2. Use the lowest amount of income you expect to receive in a month as a conservative estimate.
Either method is effective, just a matter of which best represents your circumstances. If you are more conservative with your money, you may want to consider using option number 2. Use your best judgment.
Net Worth
Your net worth is the total value of everything you own (your assets) minus the total value of everything you owe (your liabilities). It represents your current financial situation and how much wealth you have accumulated. It is an important metric to keep track of as it is a good representation of your overall financial health.
To calculate your net worth, list all your assets and liabilities and assign a realistic value to each one.
Your assets may include:
Cash and cash equivalents (e.g., checking, savings, money market accounts, etc.)
Investments (e.g., stocks, bonds, mutual funds, retirement accounts, etc.)
Real estate (e.g., primary residence, rental properties, land, etc.)
Personal property (e.g., vehicles, jewelry, furniture, electronics, etc.)
Business interests (e.g., ownership or equity in a company, partnership, etc.)
Tip
Research market comparables of your property, find the average sales price and use that value as a starting point.
Mortgage loans
Car loans
Student loans
Credit card debt
Personal loans
Medical bills
Taxes owed
Other debts or obligations
Your liabilities may include:
Once you have listed all your assets and liabilities, you need to subtract the total value of your liabilities from the total value of your assets. The result is your net worth.
Here is a real-life example of how to calculate your net worth:
Net Worth = Assets – Liabilities
Assets:
Cash: $10,000
Investments: $50,000
Real estate: $300,000
Personal property: $20,000
Business interests: $100,000
Liabilities:
Mortgage loan: $200,000
Car loan: $10,000
Student loan: $30,000
Credit card debt: $5,000
Medical bills: $2,000
Taxes owed: $3,000
Your Net Worth is:
$480,000 - $250,000 = $230,000
Total Assets: $480,000            Total Liabilities: $250,000
(Assets)
(Liabilities)
(Net Worth)
Track your progress towards your financial goals. Calculate your net worth monthly or quarterly to make sure you are gaining wealth and meeting your goals.
See where you stand: Compare your net worth to your target based on your age, income, lifestyle and location.
Evaluate your financial strengths and weaknesses. By analyzing your assets and liabilities, you can identify where you are doing well and where you need to improve.
Here’s why you should know your net worth:
See how diversified or balanced your portfolio is and whether you need to adjust your asset allocation or risk level.
Make better financial decisions. By knowing your net worth, you can plan for major life events (e.g., buying a home, starting a business, retiring, etc.) and determine how much you can afford to spend and save.
Calculate other financial ratios (e.g., debt-to-income ratio, savings rate, etc.) that can guide your budgeting and investing strategies.
Woman Working from Home
Identify Needs
Grey Areas
Identify Wants
Essential Vs Non-Essential Wants
Chapter 2
The 50/30/20 Rule
The 50/30/20 Rule
Now that we know how much our net income is and where our overall net worth stands, we can begin to work on creating a budget that fits our values and priorities. We will do this by using an effective tool called the 50/30/20 rule.
So, what is the 50/30/20 rule?
 This is a budgeting strategy that divides your money into needs, wants, savings, and debts. Using your net income divide your money accordingly:
50% Needs
30% Wants
20% Savings & Debts
This is an easy, straightforward starting point for creating your budget. However, there are some nuances and grey areas to work through. We must differentiate needs from wants and decide which wants are top priority. Then we can figure out how much we can afford to save and how much money to put towards debt repayment.
50% Needs
30% Wants
20% Savings
&
Debts
Identify Needs
The next step to creating a budget that works for you is to identify your needs. These are the essential expenses that you must pay for survival, such as housing, food, transportation, and insurance.
Your needs should take up no more than 50% of your net income. This allows you to cover your basic living expenses without compromising your ability to save for your goals and enjoy life. It also gives you some wiggle room in the case of unexpected expenses or income changes.
But how do you distinguish between your needs and your wants? How do you decide which expenses are essential and which ones are optional?
The answer is simple.
Ask yourself this question:
Can I live without it?
If the answer is yes, then it is a want. If the answer is no, then it is a need.
Here is a real-life example of how to decide if it is a need or a want:
Say you need to buy groceries. You ask yourself the question: “Can I live without it?”
The answer is no. You need food to survive. It is a need.
Cars depreciate as soon as you drive them off the lot, buy used. New cars are not a good investment inmost cases.
Ask yourself “Can I live without___?” for everything you pay for. This may seem like a redundant activity, but you’d be surprised at how many of your needs are wants in disguise.
Say you want to order pizza. You ask yourself the question: “Can I live without it?”
The answer is no. You need food to survive. However, takeout is expensive and a luxury. Takeout, restaurants and bars all belong in the wants category.
Differentiating between your needs and wants is an important task to financial freedom. Remember this is your budget, your finances, your values and your goals. Assessing your spending should be done carefully and critically.
Tip
Grey Area
Some expenses may fall into a grey area between needs and wants, depending on your situation and preferences. For example, internet and phone bills may be considered needs if you use them for work or education, but they may also be considered wants if you use them for entertainment or socializing. In these cases, use your judgment and common sense to decide whether they are needs or wants for you.
Here is a real-life example of how to navigate a grey area:
Say you pay $75 per month for internet and $100 per month for phone bills.
Ask yourself: “Can I live without it?”
Sometimes you need it for school and work but mostly you use it for relaxing and socializing.
In this case, you can consider internet and phone bills as partial needs and partial wants. You can allocate some of the cost to your needs category and some of the cost to your wants category. What percentage should go to each is something you have to decide for yourself.
Phone and internet providers are always handing out deals, especially if you’ve been a long-term customer. Reach out to customer retention and strike a deal. Reduce your plan and use free wifi where you can.
Tip
To calculate your total needs, you can use your past bills, bank statements, or receipts to estimate your average spending on each category. If your total needs are more than 50% of your net income, you need to find ways to reduce your needs or increase your income.
Ask yourself whether you can find a cheaper or free alternative that meets your needs without sacrificing your well-being.
Tip
Identify Wants
Wants are the optional expenses that make life enjoyable and fun, such as travel, entertainment, hobbies, and luxury items.
Your wants should take up no more than 30% of your net income. This allows you to indulge in some of the things that make you happy without compromising your ability to cover your needs and save for your goals. It also gives you some flexibility and freedom in your spending choices.
Not all wants are created equal. Some wants add more value to your life than others. Some wants support your well-being, align with your values and goals, and help you grow as a person. These are the wants that are worth spending money on if they fit within your budget.
Wants and Needs
Avoid wants that don’t add value to your life, conflict with your values and goals, or distract you from your purpose. These wants are not worth spending money on and will even harm you in the long run.
If the answer is yes to all then this is something worth having. If the answer is no, then pause and consider the impact this will have on your goals and your budget. If the answer is no, this is likely something you shouldn’t be spending money on.
Does it make me happy?
Does it improve my life?
Does it align with my values and goals?
Does it fit my budget?
Assess your wants by asking the following questions:
What if the answers are mixed?
“Does it make me happy?”
        Yes, I love shoes and they make me feel good.
“Does it improve my life?”
        No, I have several well-fitting, comfortable pairs.
“Does it align with my values and goals?”
        No, I value organization and I’m running out of space.
“Does it fit my budget?”
        No, I’m already over my 30% limit for this month.
Say you want to buy a new pair of shoes. You already have several pairs of shoes in your closet, but you really like this one. Ask yourself the following questions:
In this case, you should not buy the shoes. They do not improve your life or fit your budget. They may even make you unhappy later when you realize you spent money on something you did not need and have no room for.
Beware of buyer's remorse!
Save money on wants by checking second-hand stores or online marketplaces. You will be surprised at the quality of things you can find.
Tip
On the other hand, say you want to buy a book. You love reading and learning new things. You ask yourself:
“Does it make me happy?”
        Yes, I enjoy reading and it is relaxing.
“Does it improve my life?”
        Yes, reading expands my knowledge and skills.
“Does it align with my values and goals?”
        Yes, learning new things is a goal of mine.
“Does it fit my budget?”
        Yes, I still have some room in my 30% limit.
In this case, you should buy the book. It makes you happy, improves your life, helps you reach a goal, aligns with your values, and fits your budget. It is a good investment in yourself.
For argument's sake, let’s say your wants budget was tapped out. If it’s something you REALLY want, you’ll still want it next month when your 30% is reset. Be disciplined and wait it out.
Essential vs Non-Essential Wants
To prioritize your wants, look at your monthly expenses and categorize them into essential and non-essential wants.
Essential wants are the ones that make you happy, improve your life, align with your values and goals, and fit your budget. Non-essential wants are the ones that do not meet these criteria. These are the wants that are on the chopping block when push comes to shove in the budget!
To calculate your total wants, add up all your essential and non-essential expenses for a month. You can use your past bills, bank statements, or receipts to estimate your average spending on each category.
If your total wants are more than 30% of your net income, you have two options:
Reduce the amount of money you are spending on wants .Cut out or limit the non-essential wants. Shop around for better deals or discounts on the essential wants.
Increase your income to fill the gap. Sell things, you don’t use or need anymore. Start a side hustle, freelancing, or self-employment.
Prioritizing our wants and cutting out excess expenses can be a difficult task. Much like deciding our needs vs. wants, it is important to remain critical and careful. By utilizing the technique above you will have a wants list that fits within your budget, values, and goals.
Review your want purchases every few months or so, you might find an essential want becomes a non-essential want. This will allow you to be more critical of your purchases and result in longer financial success and happiness.
Tip
Woman Working from Home
Emergency Fund
Retirement Fund
Debt Snowball Method
Sinking Funds Method
How to Save and Pay Off Debt
Your savings and debt payments should take up no more than20% of your net income. This allows you to make significant progress toward your financial goals without compromising your ability to cover your needs and enjoy life. It gives you some security and peace of mind in case of unexpected expenses or income changes. This is the money that goes to emergency funds, investing, retirement funds, and paying off debts.
How do you divide your 20% between savings and debt payments? How do you decide which goals to prioritize and how much to allocate to each one?
Set up automatic payments for bills and debts to avoid interest and late fees.
Treat your savings transaction like it’s a bill to be paid to yourself.
Tip
Emergency Fund
A general rule of thumb is to save for an emergency fund first while you make your minimum debt payments. An emergency fund provides peace of mind and a resource to pull from in times of uncertainty. Your emergency fund should cover a minimum of 3 months of living expenses and sometimes up to 12 months if you own your own business or have irregular income.
Retirement Fund
Most people agree 10-15% of your income should be set aside for retirement. This money should be parked in a growth fund, so your monthly savings grow and compound over time.  If you have children, you may want to consider saving money for their college fund in a similar fashion.
You can use tax-advantaged accounts, such as 401k, IRA, RRSP, etc., to maximize your savings. These accounts help reduce the overall tax you pay every year.
Tip
If you are unsure what your total savings and debts are, review all your debt payments and current monthly savings. Tally these up and see if they fit within the50/30/20 rule. You may find yourself below or above the 20% target, and if so, consider making some adjustments.
Ultimately, you should save or invest in goals that are important to you. This will help you achieve your dreams and live a fulfilling life. Allocating 20% for debts and savings can be a tricky task, but with careful planning and execution, you will find it can become less daunting.
Money savings and investment.
It may also be in your best interest to seek outa financial advisor who can give feedback on your individual situation.
In the next two sections we will review two debt and savings methods - The Debt Snowball and Sinking Funds.
The Debt Snowball Method
If you have various debts and need to focus on paying them off, you may need to adjust the 50/30/20rule to allocate less funds to wants and more funds to debt repayment. Debts can create a large hole to dig out of if left unmanaged. Thankfully there are ways to manage debt and get your financial goals back on track.
The debt snowball method is a debt-reduction strategy that helps you pay off your debt in order of smallest to largest balance, regardless of interest rate. It helps you build momentum and motivation as you knock out each debt one by one. The feeling and reward from seeing debt balance after debt balance reaching zero isa powerful motivator which make sit such an effective debt management tool.
The debt snowball method works like this:
List your debts from smallest to largest balance, regardless of interest rate.
Make minimum payments on all your debts except the smallest one.
Pay as much as possible on your smallest debt until itis paid off.
Repeat the process with the next smallest debt, and so on, until you are debt-free.
The debt snowball method works because it focuses on behavior change, not math. It helps you see results quickly, which boosts your confidence and encourages you to keep going. It also helps you to avoid feeling overwhelmed or discouraged by your large debts.
Here is a real-life example of how to apply the Debt Snowball Method:
List your debts from smallest to largest
Furniture store
$1,700
Credit card
$2,000
Student loan
$10,000
Small business loan $11,045
Say you have four debts:
Credit card: $2,000balance, 18% interest rate, $50 minimum payment
Student loan: $10,000balance, 4% interest rate, $100 minimum payment
Furniture store: $1,700balance, 4% interest rate, $46 minimum payment
Small business loan: $11,045balance, 6% interest rate, $120 minimum payment
Your total debt is $24,745. Your total minimum payments are $316. If your net income is $2440, 20%is allocated to debt and savings, therefore you have$488 to allocate to your debt payment.
Budget for Savings & Debts = $488
Credit card minimum payment of $50
Student loan minimum payment of $100
Small business loan minimum payment of $120
$270 goes towards your minimum payments
$218 goes towards your furniture store payment
In 8 months, the furniture store debt will be paid off and you can focus on the next smallest, in this case, the credit card balance.  This time it will include your furniture store minimum payment for a total of $268 thus creating a snowball effect of paying off debt.
You would make minimum payments on all your debts except the furniture store (your lowest balance). You would pay as much as possible on the furniture store balance until it is paid off.
Savings concept
If you have a complicated debt-to-income ratio a professional financial advisor can help organize how to pay off debt and still save for retirement.
The above example utilizes the entire 20% that goes to saving sand debt payments. If you have large debts or various debts to be paid it may be advantageous to use this method. You may also consider taking some of the 30%from your wants to allocate to savings.
Tip
The Sinking Funds Method
Sinking funds are savings accounts that help you save for irregular or large expenses that are expected or planned. They help you avoid using credit cards or taking out loans when these expenses arise.
Sinking funds work like this:
Identify an expense that you need or want to save for, such as a vacation, a car repair, a large gift, or maybe your house needs anew roof soon.
Estimate how much money you need for that expense and when you need it by.
Divide the amount of money you need by the number of months until the deadline.
Save that amount every month in a separate savings account until you reach your goal.
Use the money for that specific expense only.
Here is a real-life example of how to apply the Sinking Funds method:
Say you want to save for three expenses:
Using sinking funds, you would create three separate savings accounts for each expense.
You would save the following amounts every month in each account:
Total Expense / Number of Months Away = Amount to Save Per Month
Vacation: $2,000 / 12 months = $167/ month
Car repair: $500 / 6 months = $83 / month
Christmas gift: $100 / 3 months = $33/ month
A vacation: $2,000, 12 months away
A car repair: $500, 6 months away
A Christmas gift: $100, 3 months away
Smart Budgeting by Using a Calculator and Saving
Your total monthly savings for sinking funds would be $283. You would save this amount every month until you reach your goals. Then you would use the money for those specific expenses only. This is a great way to pay for your expenses in cash without going into debt or using your emergency fund.
Sinking funds works because it helps you plan and avoid surprises. It helps you avoid going into debt or dipping into your emergency fund for non-emergencies. It also helps you enjoy your purchases without feeling guilty or stressed.
Money or revenue Growth concept
The debt snowball method and sinking funds are two powerful tools that can help you manage your money better and achieve your financial goals. They can complement the50/30/20 rule and make your budget more effective and realistic.
Set up automatic withdrawals to your savings accounts, treat it like a bill to be paid.
Tip
Woman Working from Home
High Cost of Living
Irregular Income
Large Debt, No Savings
No Debt, Large Savings
How to Adapt the50/30/20 Rule
The 50/30/20 rule is a simple and effective way to budget your money, but it is not a one-size-fits-all solution. You may need to adapt it to your situation and preferences, depending on your income level, cost of living, financial goals, and lifestyle choices.
The rule is meant to be a guideline, not a rigid formula. You can tweak the percentages or amounts for each category as needed, as long as you maintain a balance between your needs, wants, and savings.
high cost of living
HIGH COST OF LIVING
If you live in a high-cost-of-living area, you may need to spend more than 50% of your net income on your needs. In that case, you can reduce your wants to less than 30%, or increase your income by earning more or moving to a cheaper location.
IRREGULAR INCOME
If you have irregular income that varies from month to month, you may need to adjust your budget accordingly. You can use an average of your past 12 months of income to estimate your net income or use the lowest amount of income you expect to receive in a month as a conservative estimate.
You can save more in the months when you earn more and spend less in the months when you earn less.
Tip
If you have a lot of debt or no savings, you may need to prioritize your savings and debt payments over your wants. You can allocate more than 20% of your after-tax income to your savings and debt payments, or reduce your wants to less than 30%, or both. You can also use some strategies to pay off your debt faster, such as the debt snowball method.
NOTE: This is a temporary solution to help you get on track to a balanced budget that includes your essential and non-essential wants.
Erasing Debt
LARGE DEBT, NO SAVINGS
saving money
If you have no debt or a lot of savings, you may want to enjoy more of your money or invest it for higher returns. You can allocate less than 20% of your after-tax income to your savings and debt payments, increase your wants to more than 30%, or both. You can also use some strategies to invest your money wisely, such as diversifying your portfolio, using tax-advantaged accounts, or seeking advice from a professional financial advisor.
NO DEBT, LARGE SAVINGS
Budget
The 50/30/20 rule is a great starting point for anyone who wants to create a budget that is simple, realistic, and flexible. But it is not the only way to budget your money. You can adapt it or use a variation of it that works best for you.
The most important thing is to find a budgeting method that helps you manage your money better, stay consistent, and achieve your financial goals.
Woman Working from Home
Tips
Resources
Staying On Track
The 50/30/20 rule, the debt snowball method, and the sinking funds method are effective tools that can help you create and follow a budget that works for you. But your journey doesn’t end here. Following a budget takes discipline, prove to yourself that you can do this!
Update your budget and review your progress regularly. Don’t forget to celebrate your wins and achievements. Keep learning about yourself, where your values, goals and priorities lie and update your budget accordingly. This is a fluid process, there's no right or wrong. It is ever-evolving.
Be realistic and flexible. Adjust your budget as your situation changes, such as when you get a pay raise, a bill increase, or an unexpected expense.
Analyze your spending habits. Use categories and subcategories to see how you allocate and spend your money.
Reduce costs and save more. Compare prices, shop around for deals, use coupons or cashback apps, cancel unused subscriptions, or sell unwanted items.
Increase income and pay off debt faster. Ask for a raise or promotion, take on a side hustle orfreelance work, start or invest in a business, or use your skills or hobbies to generate income.
Tips
Set SMART goals and track your progress. Make sure your goals are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Use charts, graphs, or apps to track your progress and celebrate your accomplishments.
Seek advice from experts, such as financial planners, counsellors, coaches, or mentors. Read books, blogs, podcasts, or articles on personal finance topics that interest you.
Stay motivated and have fun. Reward yourself for reaching mini goals, join a community of like-minded people who support you, or gamify your budgeting process with challenges or competitions.
Tips
Congratulations on finishing this book – this knowledge will arm you with the necessary information to start a balanced budget that aligns with your priorities, values, and goals.
